Floatingpoint Systems was founded in 1970 by Norm Winningstad, which by the way is an excellent name. Uh, but by as early as 1971, they had several products out on the market that was adding floatingpoint capability to several minicomputers from the era. Floatingoint Systems was so good at doing this that in 1976, they released the AP120B, an array processor add-on that added 12 megap plops. Mega Plops. What what would that stand for? 12 megaflops of supercomputing performance, which is out of this world to think about for 1976. For reference, in 1990, the 8486 could only do one megaplop. It was 1/10enth of the processing power of the AP120B that preceded it by 15 years. However, uh that same year that the AP120B came out, the Cray 1 came out, which did 160 megaplops, um which is not to throw shade at the AP120B. That thing is incredibly powerful. It's just Seymour Cray was an alien. That's the only thing that makes sense. Either that he was a time traveler from the future. That dude built an unbelievable amount of performance in the mid 1970s. And actually, Craig's name is important here because that's going to come up a little bit later in our our story here. So, anyways, the Cray 1 was $7.9 million in 1976, but an AP120B was approximately $38,000. So, yeah, you were only getting 10% of the performance of the Cray 1, but you were paying less than 1%. But the important part here is that they're both the Cray 1 and the AP120B array processors or vector processors. I think we're running into a little bit of a terminology dispute between computer programmers and mathematicians. Programmers call them arrays and mathematicians call them vectors, but they're doing the same thing and that they're working on a whole bunch of stuff at once. Uh, so let's imagine that I have eight pairs of numbers and I want to add these numbers together. Uh, so if I were working on something like a PDP11, I would have to do that one at a time. Add the first number together, store the result in memory, load the second two numbers together, add them, store it in memory, do it one at a time until I get to the end. But in an array processor, what we do is we load up all 16 of these values at once, and we do the addition all at the same time, completely in parallel. This is so much faster than doing it one at a time. And if that sounds familiar, that's because the GPU or graphics processing unit in your computer or cell phone that you're currently watching this on is essentially doing the exact same thing. But in 1976, 50 years ago now. Oh my gosh. That's right. This is the 50th anniversary of the AP120V. That's pretty exciting, actually. Uh, so the AP120B was an absolute beast. Uh, fast forward a little bit to about 1980 and they wanted to reduce the size of the AP120B because it filled up about 20 to 25 boards that required a phenomenal amount of power. And so they made use of some uh TRW multiplier chips and other uh large scale integration techniques and got that down to about 10 boards and released that as the FPS 100. But due to the nature of the LSI chips that they were using, they couldn't run it at the same clock speed that they were running the AP120B, which means that speed dropped from 12 meglops down to 8 meglops. Uh, but architecturally, these two systems were identical, and I think you could use the same software suite on both systems completely interchangeably. Uh, but both the FPS 100 and the AP120B were pretty popular in the medical imaging field as well as the geologic field. Now, the medical field, I I get the FPS 100 and AP120B were both used on the very first CAT scanner from GE. So, you're taking several slices of somebody's brain from several different angles, and you need a lot of vector math to reconstruct all those disparate images into something that makes sense for the doctor to read. Uh, but the the geologic field, like I I don't know, like I don't know anything about that field. So, if you worked in that field, uh, sound off in the comments below. I'm curious what you guys were doing that required a colossal amount of vector processing power to figure out. Um, but the FPS and AP120B, it's important to note, are not standalone systems. They required a host system. Uh, they were pretty much just really hardcore math co-processors for, uh, a host. The uh CT scanner, for example, was uh data journal novas or eclipses. Uh I think in the geologic world, they used a lot of PDP11s. Essentially, I think if you had a minicomput and you wanted a floatingoint systems box for it, floatingoint systems would figure out a way to get that interfaced to your mini computer. They were a pretty small company and they were looking for people to sell boxes to. Uh but the host system, each host system had their own unique way of representing floatingoint data. The way Deck did it was different than the way that Data General did it, which was different than the way that Prime did it, which was a nightmare if your system was a 38bit system. So, there was a lot of translation that had to go on between the host system and the floatingoint systems box. And this is going to be a problem for us a little later. Uh, but as the 1980s marched on, computing technology was progressing very rapidly. uh and floatingoint systems knew that single instruction multiple data was kind of limited in the supercomputing field and they needed to push into something called MIMD or multiple instruction multiple data. So let's go back to our example from earlier. We have eight pairs of values and we want to do something with these pairs but we want to do something different for each pair. I want to do an addition on one, a subtraction on the other, division on a different one. we want to do a and on another. And so what we do is we load all eight of these pairs up in parallel, set different operators for each one, and then do the math completely in parallel. And you can see that this adds a ton of versatility and speed to the system, which is exactly what FPS wanted and they developed the XP series of processors. Now, initially, I think they had an XP22, but there's like no information out there on it. Uh so ultimately in 1985 they underwent a rebranding effort and released the XP32 processor. Now the XP32 processor is interesting because it gives 18 megaflops of MIMD performance but it needs the FPS100 or AP20B to act as a control processor for it. So this is like a co-processor for your co-processor for your main system. [laughter] We're getting into exhibit levels of craziness here. But the really cool thing was that multiple XP32s could be stacked. So the FPS 5000 series was their rebranded initiative here and that brought with it an FPS100 paired with 01 2 or three XP32 processors. Now the uh FPS 5100 was essentially an FPS 100 with no XP32 processors. But the uh an FPS 5400 would have been an FPS 100 with three XP32s to give you a total of 62 megaflops. Now FPS did build a bunch of other stuff throughout this time. I've only really talked about the AP120B and the FPS 100, but they were building all sorts of really cool stuff. Notably, one of my dream machines is the FPS 164. They released this in 1982. It used a 64-bit word, had eight independent pipelines, a 24-bit addressing space, and even had a D64 disk subsystem, which had 540 MGB of storage. And it could support six of those for a total of 3 GB of storage in 1982. Now, this of course, even though it was like massive, still required a host system, and there was a variety of host systems that could be used with it, but uh my favorite is the Vax 11780. The 780 is a beast of a machine, and the FPS 164 paired with an 11780 would have been one of the most performant machines on the planet, and it certainly would have been nipping at the heels of Cray. Uh now speaking of Cray, I mentioned that it was important to keep them in mind because they start to come into the picture for FPS here very soon. Uh in 1988, FPS bought out Solarity Computing. Solarity was a I think a competitor to FPS and kind of in this super mini field. And I think FPS in 88 was in dire straits and they were really hoping that the buyout of Solarity would really help them get their footing back. But uh that wasn't the case and in 1991 Cray computing bought them out. Now, at the time, FPS was developing something called a matrix co-processor. And then when Cray bought them out, it took the FPS team and kept them working on that matrix co-processor, but it rechanged the name to the Cray. And I kind of consider this to be the Swan Song of Floating Point Systems because it was their last proper design before the company had been completely absorbed into the fold of Cray. Once the Cray A was released, FloatingPoint Systems was at that point well and truly dead. Who knew where their engineering team ended up? They all went their own individual ways. And uh well, here we are. Floating Point Systems is a defunct supercomputing company from the 1970s that built some really awesome stuff. Unfortunately, not a lot of that awesome stuff is still remaining. I only know of eight systems that are surviving today. There's an FPS 100 up in the Northeast owned by my buddy Coley. There's an FPS 5100 over in Europe. There are two AP120Bs in China. There's two more AP120Bs up in Pittsburgh at the Large Scale Systems Museum. And if you've never been to the LSSM, go check them out. Dave Maguire is just an absolute riot and all the volunteers there are doing amazing work. Uh, then there is one AP120B currently on eBay that the seller is asking $8,000 [laughter] for, which is ludicrous and ridiculous. It's been for sale for well over a year and he started at 16,000 and like whatever. That one might as well not exist. Uh, and then finally, the eighth system that we know about is this FPS 3000 right here. But the FPS 3000 is a very weird machine. You'll notice that when I was talking about the history of FPS, I never once mentioned the 3000 series. This apparently was part of their rebranding effort. And it is an XP32 machine. But if you remember, I was saying that if you have an XP32 processor, you absolutely need an FPS 100 or an AP120B to be the control processor for that XP32. Well, this can support two XP32 processors, but it doesn't need an FPS 100 or an AP120B to be the control processor because it has a control processor built into it. And that is this card right here, which is a Versabus single board computer. This has a Motorola 68000 on it, ticking away at 8 MHz. has 128K of onboard dualport RAM, 64K of onboard ROM, two RS232 serial ports, and that's all just on the local side. What makes this so unique is that it has effectively two buses. You have the local bus that touches the uh CPU, ROM, and RAM, and then you have the Versa bus that touches everything else. And that's what they're using to control the FPS 3000 and XP32 processors here. I think uh there's zero documentation out there for the FPS 3000. Like nothing. We can't even find a mention of it anywhere on the internet. And we certainly don't have any schematics, not for a single one of the cards in here. So really everything that I'm about to say about the FPS 3000 is just me taking kind of guesses based upon what I'm looking at here. We have the what I'm calling XP32 bus, the Versa bus, and the host system bus. The XP32 processor, memory control, and 1 megabyte of RAM share the XP32 bus. Then the VersaBus translator and universal formatter go between the XP32 and VersaBus to provide all of the translation between those two different types of buses. And finally, the AP interface goes between the host system and the Versa bus. This is just like a complete guess. I have no idea if this is correct. This is just the only thing that makes sense to me based upon the ribbon cable layout on the front here and what cards are plugged into what. But since we don't have any schematics or documentation or anything really, this is pretty much just a stab in the dark. But um [snorts] what's stopping us from just plugging it in and seeing what happens? Like nothing really. Let's just let's do that. Well, not nothing. We we don't have any way to plug the thing into the wall. The original power cord was all rotted, so I cut it out. To make sure I have nice, clean access to absolutely everything, let's remove the front grill, then flip the thing up onto its side, and then get to work routing a new cable. I'm going to use a heavyduty extension cord that I'll sacrifice for this. I need to first remove all the remnants of the old cable. Then I need to cut my extension cord to length, strip it back, then crimp on connectors for each of the three wires. After that, I'll snake it through the opening on the back, then route the live, neutral, and ground to their respective places. Tighten it all down with the screws and finally put in the strain relief grommet. With the cable sorted, I'll lay the machine flat again, then remove the side panel to gain access to all the cards. And for initial testing, we're going to remove every single card. These are all incredibly rare and the last thing I want to do is explode them with a faulty power supply. Since we have all the boards out, let's just take a quick look at them one by one. Starting with this one. This is the main data, which I believe is 1 megabyte of system common memory. This is memory that the uh Versabus single board computer should be able to put data into and that the uh XP32 processor should be able to pull data out of. But otherwise, it looks like a pretty standard DRAM board. This is the MIM CTRL board or memory control board. Uh my guess is that this contains all of the DRAM refresh logic as well as the CAS and RAZ and all of the selection logic that's required to keep the DRAM alive as well as dictate where data is coming in from and where data is going out to. Now we're getting into some exciting stuff. The XP32 processor is divided up across two boards, an arithmetic unit and an executive unit. And this is the arithmetic unit. Uh, notably it has three way chips on here. These are uh WTL 1032 and 1033. I believe there's two of these way adders and one of these way multipliers because uh we believe that this thing was optimized to doing fast forier transforms. Uh and then the rest of this is just filled with a boatload of really fast static RAM. Uh and these are the primary feeds into the uh way arithmetic unit over here. And this is the other half of the XP32, the executive unit. Uh, and it has two of these absolutely stunning AM29116s. These are 16bit bit slice alus, so our full 32 bits there. Uh, there's a collection of ROMs over here which are going to store the executive unit micro code. That should be 2K by 80 bits wide. Uh, and then there's a uh collection of other stuff. [laughter] I don't I don't really know what's going on, but this these 29116s, I'm absolutely in love with these. I would love to see these used uh in a homebrew someday. I think they're just absolutely stellar chips. This is the API or arithmetic processor interface. Uh this is the uh primary interface to the host system. There's a collection of uh static RAMs over here that are all dualport and uh all of these together create a 32-bit wide collection of static RAM registers. Uh and essentially I think what's happening is uh information is coming in from the host system into that static RAM and then this is translating it and then shoving it out to the Versa bus. And I think that these DIP switches here allow you to select different types of host systems but uh unfortunately we don't have any documentation so we don't know what host system this one was set up for. This is the universal formatterater. Uh, and it actually connects up to the VersaBus translator via these two little ribbon cables right up here on the top. So, it's closely related to the next board as well. Uh, my best guess is that this is doing the formatting translation between the XP32 bus, which is 32-bits wide and uses a specific floatingpoint format, and the Versa bus, which is 16 bits wide and uses a completely different format. This is the counterpart to that universal formatter that we were just looking at, the uh VersaBus translator. Um, again, there's I [laughter] don't really know what's going on here. There's three chips over here that are massive. These are MC 681 153s. Uh, I don't know what those are offhand. I'll have to look them up. But, um, I don't know. It's a cool looking board. Lots of green bodgege wires going on here. So, uh, apparently four layers was not enough. And finally, we've come full circle to the uh Motorola built Versabus single board computer with its absolutely beautiful 68K up here. The uh two ROMs here that is going to be controlling all of everything. Uh I've actually dumped both of those and they're over on the GitHub. I'll put a link in the description below if you're curious. Uh other than that, we don't really know a whole lot about this. There's no schematics out there. There is some documentation that explains how the uh bus layouts work and how it works as a bus master and whatnot, but um that's really I don't think that's going to help us all that much in understanding the FPS 3000. All right, let's throw some electrons at this thing and see what happens. The power supply is on a little hinged door here. And with it swung down, we can get a look at this insane 5V power supply. It generates 5 volts at 200 amps. That's 1,000 watts of 5 volts only. It's essentially an arc welder. Everything of importance has been removed. All that's left is uh a little bit of power supply logic all the way on the front there. Uh and then obviously, you know, the power supplies. Uh I am expecting this to generate 5 volts, plus 12 volts, and maybe minus 12 volts. Uh and well, 5 volts is the big one. This does 5 volts at 200 amps. So, I have no idea what that thing is going to do. But, uh what we're hoping to see is there's a little AC on light on the back here that we want to see come on. We want to see that fan on the front come on. and then this fan on the back come on. And if all of that happens without anything catching on fire, we'll go through and uh check all the voltage rails. And then if that looks good, we'll start plugging cards in. So, uh here goes nothing. Fan on the front came on. Fan on the back did not come on. Uh we do have a little red light all the way over there. And uh our AC on light is flickering a little bit, but I think we can start checking some stuff. Uh, okay. If we check uh the 5volt rail here, nothing. 12volt rail, nothing. Uh, okay. So, we're not generating any voltages. Um, well, the fan on the back isn't spinning, which is a big giveaway. But the biggest giveaway is that there's a uh onoff switch on the front here. So, I don't know why the power supply fan is spinning. Um, maybe this primary power supply fan spins all the time and then this one turns on the big one on the back or something. I don't know. But, let's flip it and find out. Oh yeah, that's very loud. Uh, but we do have a little power LED on here. Uh, we got two red LEDs on on the inside there. I think we're okay to start checking voltages now. Looks like we've got a nice, clean, and stable 5 Vs. That's good. But when I check the plus and minus 12VT lugs, there's nothing on them. And this was confusing to me. I started chasing down the lugs and there isn't anything in this chassis that can actually generate plus and minus 12 volts. The little power supply card over here doesn't have any regulation stuff on it and the lugs are not connected to any of the cables coming off the back plane. My theory is they would connect an external supply to these two lugs for testing, but since the Versabus single board computer card is the only thing that uses plus and 12vt and it's only used for the RS232 serial ports on the SBC, once they put the production ROMs in, they don't use the RS232 ports anymore. So, there's no need to have plus and minus 12 volts. That's annoying because it sent me down this weird rabbit hole, but also it means that our power is completely good because this is a pure 5VT only machine. So, let's get all the cards slotted back in and put some power into everything. Now, we're getting exciting. Everything's loaded up. Um, there's a lot of things that could blow up. There's a lot of tail caps on there. So, uh, I have no idea what's going to happen, but let's flip the switch and, uh, hopefully no smoke. We have a host interrupt enable light on. I don't know if that's good or bad, [laughter] but I didn't see any fire or brimstone, so that's I'll count that as a win. Well, it turns on. Uh, nothing went up in smoke. We get a host interrupt enabled light on the front and nothing else. It's completely and totally inert. Um, but I don't think it's actually broken. I think this thing is sitting here at 100% functionality raring to go. But we have nothing to tell it where to go or what to do. So in that regard, we have a couple of massive problems that I think might actually kill this whole project, unfortunately. Uh the first is that we don't know what the host system originally was. The AP interface card that's in here is completely and totally undocumented. So we have no idea what it's set up for. Although my guess is that it's probably a vax or some other kind of 32-bit system. But it gets even worse and that is that we don't have any software for this thing. No XP32 software is known to survive. It's all gone. I've scoured the internet for over a year now looking for anything about XP32 systems or FPS 3000 or 5000 stuff and nothing. Without having software, what does what does that mean? Why are we dead in the water without software? Because we should be able to reverse engineer the instruction set potentially and feed data into this thing. But well, the problem is with the XP32 itself. The executive unit has microode stored in very high-speed programmable readonly memories or PROMs. But the arithmetic unit uses a 128 bit micro word that is stored in RAM. So something needs to be loading the microode into that RAM so that way the arithmetic unit knows what operations it needs to run using those way chips. And there's two paths about how that microode could make it into the RAM. The first is that if we're incredibly lucky, the executive unit could be generating that microode on the fly. The second is something far more terrifying and that is that the software generates that microode and loads it in. That's what the BowMim higherformance vector processor does and it uses a lot of the same chips, the same way chips, the same AM29116. It's a very similar construction for that vector processor and this FPS 3000. Without the software, we may never be able to get this thing to do anything at all. So, where does that leave the floatingoint systems project? We know that we can't use the FPS 3000 and an FPS 100 together. The 3000 has its own built-in Versabus control processor. So, it's a completely separated thing. And I think we should probably dedicate this to a system that's more appropriate for it, like a VAX or something like that, which means that it's going to leave the PDP1144 and we're going to focus on an FPS 100. This is a full board set for an FPS 100. All 11 boards that we need, it's complete. Uh we have two data pads here. Uh then we have a floating adder and a floating multiplier over here. Then we have our P1, P2, P3. This is going to build out the processor for it. Uh we have our main data memory as well as table memory over here that's full of a bunch of ROMs. And then finally, we have our PDP11 interface card with our formatter card. With these 11 boards, we should be able to get a fully complete FPS100 up and running with the exception of a back plane. Uh these all have to connect to each other and it's not a universal back plane. Uh, essentially what FPS did was they created a net list and they had a machine that would do all the wire wrapping for them. Uh, so we're going to have to recreate that only without a wire wrap machine. Also, we got to figure out how to build a box for this thing. All I have is this set of boards right here. Uh, so I got to build a box. I got to find a power supply for it. I got to get all that wired up. And then we got to build a back plane from scratch. So, um, we [snorts] got a [laughter] we got a serious serious journey ahead of us, but, uh, this is now a hardware journey because we have all of the soft, not all, we have most of the software for a FPS 100, and it's all meant for an RSX11M operating system on a Unibus PDP11, which we happen to have set up over there. So, the only thing holding us back from doing real deal supercomputing shenanigans in this room is a new back plane, and that's what we're going to get to work on in 2026. And I hope to be doing some vector processing before the end of the year. So, I'm pretty excited about that, even though this is going to be an extremely difficult journey. So, I want to thank you all so much for watching, and I hope to see you in the next one. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; That's a lot of work.